---
layout: post
title: On open collaborative proposal writing
---

This is a debriefing rant about the open collaborative writing of the
[OpenDreamKit](http://opendreamkit.org/) proposal, mostly as notes for
self (=Nicolas) for future occasions: how to approach it, what tools
to use, some tricks and pitfalls to avoid, ...

Context
-------

The OpenDreamKit proposal was written collaboratively by a diverse team
across Europe and science. Have fun watching this
[video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kM9zcfRtOqo), produced with
[Gource](https://code.google.com/p/gource/), of the activity on our
[collaborative work space on github](https://github.com/sagemath/grant-europe/).
A pretty good illustration -- especially during the final sprint -- of
how a dispersed but dedicated team can collaborate efficiently with
modern tools! You may enjoy as well reading this fun [blog
post](http://inverseprobability.com/2015/01/14/open-collaborative-grant-writing/).

Stand by your dreams
--------------------

Write a proposal that you and all participants believe is right.

-   Go open.

    Then you won't have a choice than being proud of what you write :-)

    What we kept private: personal info like salary, the mailing list
    for discussions (see below), the nity grity details of the budget
    that are not so relevant anyway, some TODO lists.

-   Use a bottom up approach.

    Start by analyzing the needs of the community. Choose the call
    accordingly. And then, and only then, think about a great selling
    story that will make the call and the needs match naturally
    together.

-   Encourage the participants to shape the proposal to feel included,
    and to base all their decisions upon what they believe in.

Engage the community
--------------------

The main point of writing this proposal in the open was to get feedback
from the community. This allowed for example to rework early on some
phrasing that could have been misinterpreted.

Yet we did not get as much feedback as I was hoping for. This is
probably because a proposal is a massive amount of information. So it's
hard for an outsider to make one's way through it. In particular because
quite some of the information is not directly relevant to the community,
and because the overall structure will tend to remain messy for a long
time. Here are some tips that might help next time.

-   Build a shared vision:

    Write early on -- and keep updating -- a short introduction page on
    the web site with tentative answers to the following questions:

    -   Who are we?
    -   What is our goal
    -   What is our strategy?
    -   From where do we start?
    -   How do we connect or differ from other projects?
    -   Why are we excellent?

    Furthermore, add direct links to the main tasks.

-   Whenever relevant, write a draft of the tasks as independent tickets
    (typically, for us, on trac.sagemath.org). People will then stumble
    naturally on those that are of interest to them, and react.
    Encourage them to take an active role to shape the tasks in the most
    useful way for the community.

Engage your team
----------------

Easier to say than to do :-)

In short: run forward and trust your team mates: they have talent.

This [blog
post](http://inverseprobability.com/2015/01/14/open-collaborative-grant-writing/)
gave me an interesting perspective from the participant side. The key
thing is that it's both hard and intimidating to get involved.

For the technical side, see the next section.

Collaborative tools
-------------------

Using the right tools is critical for productive collaborative proposal
writing. In case you have a doubt, watch the
[video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kM9zcfRtOqo) of the activity on
our repository.

Some participants won't be familiar with the tools, and may push toward
basic solutions like dropbox+word. This is *NOT* an option when 20
people hack simultaneously on the same files. Stay firm, train them, and
work hard to keep the technical barrier low.

(for this particular proposal, having some technical barrier was
actually not such a bad thing: I wanted to select tech savvy people
anyway).

### Use a good version control system (e.g. git)

A decentralized version control system (like git or mercurial) has a key
advantage of offering massive backups.

Having a web interface to the repository is nice for people to easily
browse the information and do small edits.

github did the job to host our repository. It was ok since we had only
public information (no private info on the cloud, please!). There are of
course alternatives (e.g. gitlab based).

### Use a public repository

Be liberal in giving write access. People tend to be shy by default
anyway; and if accidently someone would go to far it's always possible
to revert.

### Use a good document writing infrastructure (e.g. LaTeX)

The proposal document contains a *lot* of redundant information (e.g.
gantt chart, lists of tasks/deliverables/..., involvement measures,
budget, ...). It is *vital*, especially for the final rush, to have some
appropriate infrastructure that builds automatically all of those from
duplication free and well located semantic information.

LaTeX and the
[proposal](http://www.ctan.org/tex-archive/macros/latex/contrib/proposal)
style file is a good technical option.

Choose such an infrastructure, make the compilation procedure completely
automatic (`make`, with typically two variants to build either the draft
version with comment or the final version). Get an expert on board to
help, and push the infrastructure to its limits.

We went quite far in this direction. Next time I would want to go even
further and also build the external budget files automatically from the
semantic information in the proposal (not yet implemented).

There is one difficulty here: building the budget files requires to
store some information that is private, like the salary of the
participants. A good approach would be to have a secondary private git
repository with read-write access granted only to, e.g., site leaders
and staff. The private info probably could take the form of a single
table like latex file associating info like salary to participants. The
infrastructure shall allow to build the proposal itself with or without
the private info.

### Document building and version control

Usual tip: don't put automatically produced files (e.g. pdf's) under
version control to avoid conflicts.

Exception: if you use like us the web repository browser as web site for
the proposal, you may want to commit from time to time the proposal's
pdf to make it accessible to everybody. That's alright, but do it under
a specific name, so that people don't conflict with it when they build
the pdf locally. See e.g. the `final` dependency in our [](Makefile).

Finding a nice acronym
----------------------

There are many acronym generators online that can be quite helpful in
the process. But at the end of the day it's all about creativity; get
everyone involved. In our case we were rather stuck until Paul came up
with the serendipitous idea to use "Digital" rather than "Virtual"
(Dream sounds better than Vream :-) ).

Communication
-------------

### Meetings

The meeting we had in September was fundamental to discuss the needs and
shape the proposal. A bit earlier in the process (e.g. 6 months before)
would have been good. A bit longer (3 days instead of 2) could have
helped too. At the end of the meeting, there should be:

-   A first draft of answers to the questions above
-   Some idea of what the selling story will be (how do we fit the
    call?)
-   A tentative list of aims and objectives
-   A tentative list of work packages, with designated leaders for each
    of them
-   A tentative list of sites, with leaders for each of them

Having a second meeting one or two months before the submission would
have been helpful to launch the final rush, brainstorm on the texts. We
mitigated this with online chats.

### Online video chats

Online video chats were extremely useful, especially for brainstorming
with 2-3 people on sensitive pieces of text (intro to the proposal, work
package descriptions, ...), for getting to know each other, and for fast
distribution of tasks at the end. Use them early on and regularly.

We used intensively [appear.in](http://appear.in) for this. It can't get
simpler: just share a URL (we used <http://appear.in/vre-math>) with
your collaborators and you are up and running. It worked for us with
chrome, safari, firefox. It's peer to peer, so in term of privacy it
should be alright.

A limitation: if one of the person had a low bandwidth, this seemed to
affect everybody in the chat room; turning of the video usually helped.

When brainstorming on chunks of text we wanted to see the evolving text
simultaneously. Git was not enough for this. So we used temporary google
documents. Not very satisfying. I am still looking for a good
peer-to-peer collaborative plain text editor.

### Mailing list

We used a private mailing list. I believe that this helped people speak
openly on more sensitive matters. But that's debatable. Still we were
liberal in including interested external people to get feedback.

Most of the communication went on this mailing list; roughly 1200
e-mails; with 400 of them in the last two days; crazy ...

The good thing was that everybody could see what was going on. That's
good in particular at the beginning, when there is little action and
it's important to attract attention and to show off that the project is
alive. Having an archive is important too so that anyone can dig for
information. You can't get this with private discussions.

However this went *really* overboard at the end: for all the
participants that were partially involved, sorting through all the
information to find the one that was relevant to them was hard. Many of
them spent as much time reading through the e-mails as really acting.
This is totally unproductive.

I don't have a good solution. I was trying to make it clear at the top
of each e-mail who was directly involved (dear XXX); however this was
clearly not sufficient. A step could be to setup some official keyword
conventions for the subject line, to let people sort them efficiently.
Something like:

    H2020: WP leaders: ...
    H2020: WP HPC: ...
    H2020: Site leaders: ...
    H2020: All participants: ...

Or maybe use some other communication media than mailing lists.

### TODO list

It must be trivial for each participant to find out what (s)he could do
for the project at any given point. The `\TOWRITE{XXX}{...}` lines in
the latex sources are natural spots to write this information.

However extracting and synthesizing this information is necessary to
really engage people (they won't `git pull` the latest version and run
`grep` by themselves unless they are already seriously engaged).

Sending the synthesis list by e-mail did not work that well. Instead it
should be posted on the web. We were using initials (and keywords for
tasks that could be handled by several persons in a group). First names
probably would have worked better. In any cases, the list of names /
keywords should be standardized.

